               CS6493: Natural Language Processing - Assignment 1
      Instructions
        1. Due at 10 pm, Mar. 11, 2026;
        2. You can submit your answers by a  single  PDF  with  the  code  package or a  single  Jupiter  notebook 
          containing both the answers and the code;
        3. For the coding questions, besides the code, you are encouraged to additionally give some descriptions of your 
          code design and its workflow. Detailed analysis of the experimental results is also preferred;
        4. Total marks are 100;
        5. If  you  have  any  questions,  please  post  your  questions  on  the  Canvas-Discussion  forum  or  contact  TA  Mr. 
          Junyi ZHOU (junyizhou8-c@my.cityu.edu.hk).
                                        1
       Question 1
       (11 marks) We could represent the word with one-hot encoding in a language model instead of ascii representations.
       That is, we represent the word w with:
                                          ∥V∥
                                      z    }|   {
                                      [0,0,...,1,...,0,0]
         where V is our vocabulary and ∥V∥ is the size of it. Consider a vocabulary V = {cat,dog,run,runs}.
        1. Representation Construction (2 points)
          Write the standard one-hot vector representation for each word in V, assuming words are ordered lexicographi-
          cally.
        2. Inner Product and Similarity (3 points)
          Compute the dot product between the one-hot vectors of any two distinct words.
          What does this result imply about semantic similarity under one-hot encoding? Why is this problematic for
          modeling linguistic relationships?
        3. Parameter EfÏciency (3 points)
          Suppose these one-hot vectors are used as input to a linear layer with weight matrix W ∈ R4×d, where d = 128.
          How many parameters are required to represent the entire embedding table for V?
          If the vocabulary size grows to |V| = 50,000, how many parameters would be needed? List two practical issues
          this scaling causes.
        4. Failure to Capture Morphology (2 points)
          The words run and runs exhibit a clear morphological relationship (verb inflection).
          Can this relationship be automatically recognized from their one-hot representations? Why or why not?
          What challenge does this pose for generalizing to unseen inflected forms (e.g., from jump to jumps)?
                                           2
               Question 2
               (24 marks) In the field of NLP, for a sequence of text S = {w1,w2,...,wT}, the statistical language model transforms
               the joint probability of a sequence into a product of conditional probabilities:
                                                                                                       T
                                                             P(S)=P(w ,w ,...,w ) = Yp(w |w ,w ,...,w                                   )
                                                                               1    2         T                 t   1     2        t−1
                                                                                                      t=1
                    However, this formulation is not useful in practice due to the huge computational costs. We prefer to use its
               simplified version - the n-gram model:
                                                                  p(w |w ,w ,...,w             ) ≈ p(w |w             , ..., w     )
                                                                       t   1     2        t−1             t   t−n+1            t−1
               Weusually use bi-gram (n=2) or tri-gram (n=3) to model the language. Consider the sentence:
                       “I am taking CS6493 this semester and studying NLP is really fascinating”
               Assume words are separated by whitespace and punctuation is ignored.
                   1. n-gram Context Extraction and Sparsity Analysis (8 points)
                          a. List all bigrams where the second word is either CS6493 or NLP.
                          b. List all trigrams where the third word is either CS6493 or NLP.
                   2. Critical Evaluation of n-gram Models (6 points)
                          a. Explain why n-gram models cannot generalize to novel sequences composed of known words.
                          b. Discuss how the Markov assumption limits the modeling of long-range dependencies. Provide a concrete
                              example where this causes failure.
                          c. Why do n-gram models require large corpora to perform well? Relate your answer to the curse of dimen-
                              sionality.
                   3. Neural Language Model Design and Parameter Sensitivity (10 points)
                       The following PyTorch code defines a neural language model:
                       class LanguageModeler(nn.Module):
                               def         i n i t     ( self ,      vocab size , embedding dim , context size , hidden size=128):
                                       super(LanguageModeler , self ).                              i n i t     ()
                                       self . embeddings = nn.Embedding(vocab size , embedding dim)
                                       self . linear1 = nn. Linear(context size ∗ embedding dim , hidden size)
                                       self . linear2 = nn. Linear(hidden size , vocab size)
                               def forward(self , inputs ):
                                       embeds = self .embeddings(inputs ).view((1, −1))
                                       out = F. relu( self . linear1 (embeds))
                                       out = self . linear2(out)
                                       log probs = F.log softmax(out , dim=1)
                                       return log probs
                       You aim to train a four-gram model (predict next word from previous three) on the given sentence for 10
                       epochs.
                          a. Describehowyouwouldpreprocessthesentencetogeneratetrainingexamplesoftheform(w                                                           , w      , w     ) →
                              w.                                                                                                                                 t−3     t−2      t−1
                                t
                          b. Write a minimal training loop (pseudocode or Python) that trains the model for one epoch using the
                              generated data.
                          c. Compare the expected training dynamics (e.g., loss convergence) when using embedding dimensions of 32,
                              64, and 128. Discuss trade-offs in capacity, generalization, and computational cost.
                                                                                                  3
            Question 3                (45 marks)
            Training word embeddings can be achieved through different approaches. Two popular methods are Word2Vec and
            GloVe (Global Vectors for Word Representation). While Word2Vec learns word embeddings by predicting context
            words from a target word (Skip-gram) or predicting a target word from its context (CBOW), GloVe learns embeddings
            by factorizing the global word co-occurrence matrix.
            Word2Vec Skip-gram
            Word2VecSkip-gram learns word embeddings by maximizing the probability of observing context words given a target
            word. In practice, negative sampling is commonly used to efÏciently approximate the softmax objective.
                Given a target word w and a context word w , the negative sampling objective is:
                                          i                          o
                                                                          K
                                                            ⊤           X                          ⊤      
                                               L=logσ u v             +      E             logσ −u v           ,
                                                             w wi              w ∼P (w)              w wi
                                                               o                k   n                  k
                                                                         k=1
            where vw denotes the input (target) word embedding, uw denotes the output (context) word embedding, K is the
            number of negative samples, σ(·) is the sigmoid function, and P (w) is the noise distribution.
                                                                                      n
            GloVe
            GloVe minimizes the weighted least squares objective on the global word–word co-occurrence matrix:
                                                            V                                        
                                                           X               ⊤             ˜              2
                                                     J =        f(X ) w w˜ +b +b −logX                   ,
                                                                     ij    i   j     i    j         ij
                                                          i,j=1
            where Xij is the number of times word j occurs in the context of word i, f(·) is a weighting function that helps prevent
                                                                                                                         ˜
            very frequent co-occurrences from dominating, and w ,w˜ are word vectors with bias terms b ,b .
                                                                          i   j                                        i   j
            Tasks
               1. Train a Word2Vec Skip-gram model with negative sampling on the provided wiki corpus.txt. Use appro-
                  priate hyperparameters such as embedding dimension, window size, and negative sampling rate.                                  (15
                  marks)
               2. Train a GloVe model on the same wiki corpus.txt. Students may either implement the algorithm from
                  scratch or use existing GloVe implementations or libraries with comparable hyperparameters (same embedding
                  dimension and context window as your Skip-gram model).                                                               (15 marks)
               3. Compare and evaluate the quality of the two models:
                      • Performqualitativeevaluationbyexaminingnearestneighborsforselectedwords(e.g., “Australia”, “YMCA”,
                        “South”, “building”).
                      • Investigate the effect of at least one hyperparameter (e.g., embedding dimension: 50, 100, 200, or context
                        window size: 2, 5, 10) on the learned embeddings.
                                                                                                                                       (15 marks)
                                                                               4
      Question 4
      (20 marks) Splitting a text into smaller chunks is a task that is harder than it looks, and there are multiple ways of
      doing so.
        1. Simple space tokenization has limitations when processing certain types of text. From the examples below, select
         at least TWO cases and explain why space tokenization would be problematic for each. (5 marks)
           • Compound words (e.g., “state-of-the-art”)
           • Contractions (e.g., “don’t”, “we’re”)
           • URLs/emails (e.g., “user@email.com”)
           • Hashtags (e.g., “#MachineLearning”)
           • Numbers with units (e.g., “3.14km”)
        2. Transformers models use a hybrid approach between word-level and character-level tokenization called subword
         tokenization. BPE(Byte-Pair Encoding) is a subword-level tokenization approach introduced in Neural Machine
         Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units (Sennrich et al., 2015). . BPE relies on a pre-tokenizer that
         splits the training data into words. Pretokenization can be as simple as space tokenization. Let us assume that
         after pre-tokenization, the following set of words including their frequency has been determined:
                         (old,10),(older,5),(oldest,8),(hug,8),(pug,4),(hugs,5)
         Weobtain an base vocabulary:
                                   o,l,d,e,r,s,t,h,u,g,p
         Splitting all words into symbols in the base vocabulary, we obtain:
                    (o,l,d,10),(o,l,d,e,r,5),(o,l,d,e,s,t,8),(h,u,g,8),(p,u,g,4),(h,u,g,s,5)
         BPEthencountsthefrequencyofeachpossiblesymbolpairandpicksthesymbolpairthatoccursmostfrequently.
         In the above example,“o” followed by “l” is present 10+5+8 = 23 times. Thus, the first merge rule the tokenizer
         learns is to group all “o” symbols followed by an “l” symbol together. Next, “ol” is added to the vocabulary.
         The set of words then becomes:
                     (ol,d,10),(ol,d,e,r,5),(ol,d,e,s,t,8),(h,u,g,8),(p,u,g,4),(h,u,g,s,5)
         This process will run iteratively. The vocabulary size, i.e. the base vocabulary size + the number of merges,
         is a hyperparameter to choose. The learned merge rules would then be applied to new words (as long as those
         new words do not include symbols that were not in the base vocabulary). The word not in the base vocabulary
         would be repersented as “[unk]”. Implement this BPE tokenizer, set the vocabulary size as 16 and train this
         BPEtokenizer to finish the iterative proecss. Use the trained tokenizer to tokenize the words below:(15 marks)
                             {hold,oldest,older,pug,mug,huggingface}.
                                        5
